---
layout: post
title:  "Blog Post 7 - An open source view of my current projects"
date:   2020-03-03 16:30:00 +0100
categories: assignment
---

As a computer science student, it's not rare that I take part in projects, often as part of an assignment for a class, sometimes on my own.
Before taking this course (HFOSS), I had of course heard about free and open source software.
However, I did not really know what it implied and what tools I used were free and open source.
This blog post aims at assessing what tools that I currently use for two of my current projects are actually open source.

# Designing a secure online election system

As part of my security class, I got to work with some technology that was new to me.
For this class’s main project, we are to develop a program that makes use of the security principles reviewed in class, taking inspiration from various research papers.
Our group chose to go for **a secure online election system** (which is kind of an oxymoron, but we're not going to dive into this right now).

We chose **Python** as the main programming language we’re going to be using.
I’ve already worked with Python in the past, but I’d assess my Python knowledge and skills as quite shallow.
Python is, as I expected after completing the bug fix assignment, a free and open source programming language owned by the Python Software Foundation.
I wasn't able to understand exactly what license it uses but it's open source for sure.

We also chose to use a web framework to facilitate coding the website, especially the backend and database management part.
The framework is called [**Django**][django].
It is also licensed under a free and open source software license : the BSD license.

Finally, I decided to set up a Python virtual environment using **virtualenv**.
This is the part of programming that horrifies me the most.
Having to deal with setting up working environments is a real nightmare and is what often makes me give up on projects.
This time, I was surprisingly successful in getting a virtual environment working on my computer by using [this documentation][venv].
I'm now sure that my environment uses the same versions of Django and Python and the same plugins as the other members of my team.
This tool is also licensed under a free and open source license : the MIT License (MIT).

All of this make up for a pretty open-source-oriented project.
Even vscode that I use as IDE/text editor is licensed under the MIT license.

# Developing my first android app

About a week ago, I started working on **developing my first android app**.

I daily use notes applications to keep track of homework assignments, grocery shopping and various todo lists.
For a long time now, I’ve used Google’s Note Keep application.
It basically does everything you need it to do.
However, I’m not particularly fond of sharing yet another chunk of my personal information with Google.
That’s why I decided to code a similar app myself.
I’ve also wanted to learn how to code android apps for a while, which was another motivation to start this project.

Doing so, I wondered what was open source licensed and what wasn’t as far as the tools, IDE, and code I used were concerned.
The Android operating system is part of the [AOSP][aosp] which stands for **Android Open Source Project** and which, as its name suggests, is open source.
However, [some people argue that Google controls it too much][android-google].
That doesn't really seem compatible with the free and open source philosophy.
What’s also argued in the article is that the base of the system is indeed open source, but that this base is purposely paired with key proprietary apps and services.
Android Studio, the IDE I use to code my app is also surprisingly part of the AOSP, which means it’s open source as well.

For now, I don’t really know what I’m going to do with the app once it’s finished, I don’t even know if I’m going to make use of it myself.
But if I end up being confident enough to decide to make it available to the public (which is not likely), it may be a good opportunity to make my first decent contribution to the FOSS community.
I would however need to look into the legal implications in more detail.

[django]: https://www.djangoproject.com/
[venv]: https://packaging.python.org/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/
[aosp]: https://source.android.com
[android-google]: https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2018/07/googles-iron-grip-on-android-controlling-open-source-by-any-means-necessary/
